Motivation Locating suspicious transactions
patterns through automated
anomaly detection
Identifying success factors for
historical pumps
Examining how pump-and-
dumps are correlated with
cryptocurrency price
Predicting the coin to be pumped
with input of Telegram signals
Methodology Breakout indicators & rein-
forcers
Ordinary least squares (OLS) OLS, difference in difference RF, GLM
Data Market data of cryptocurrencies
from April 2018 to May 2018 on
Binance, Bittrex, Kraken, Kucoin
and Lbank
Explicit (with coin announce-
ment) and suspected (no coin an-
nouncement) pump-and-dumps
from January 2018 to July 2018
Pump-and-dump events from
May 2017 to August 2018 on Bi-
nance, Bittrex, and Yobit, with a
focus on Bittrex
Pump-and-dump events from
June 2018 to February 2019 on
Binance, Bittrex, Cryptopia and
Yobit, with a focus on Cryptopia
Main finding
/
contribution
The authors develop a defin-
ing criteria set for detecting sus-
picious activity like pump-and-
dumps.
Pumping obscure, small-market-
cap coins is more likely to be suc-
cessful.
Pump-and-dumps are detrimen-
tal to the liquidity and price of
cryptocurrencies.
Pump-and-dumps schemes can
be found and foiled by machine
learning.
Table 5: Comparison of studies on cryptocurrency pump-and-dump.
examine bubbles in the Ripple and Bicoin markets;
Baur et al. [6] investigate asymmetric volatility effects of
large cryptocurrencies and discover that in the crypto market
positive shocks increase the volatility more than negative ones.
Jahani et al. [19] assess whether and when the discussions
of cryptocurrencies are truth-seeking or hype-based, and dis-
cover a negative correlation between the quality of discussion
and price volatility of the coin.
7 Conclusions
This paper presents a detailed study of pump-and-dump
schemes in the cryptocurrency space. We start by present-
ing the anatomy of a typical attack and then investigate a
variety of aspects of real attacks on crypto-coins over the last
eight months on four crypo-exchanges. The study demon-
strates the persisting nature of pump-and-dump activities in
the crypto-market that are the driving force behind tens of
millions of dollars of phony trading volumes each month. The
study reveals that pump-and-dump organizers can easily use
their insider information to profit from a pump-and-dump
event at the sacrifice of fellow pumpers.
Through market investigation, we further discover that mar-
ket movements prior to a pump-and-dump event frequently
contain information on witch coin will be pumped. Using
LASSO regularized GML and balanced random forests, we
build various models that are predicated on the time and venue
(exchange) of a pump-and-dump broadcast in a Telegram
group. Multiple models display high performance across all
subsamples, implying that pumped coins can be predicted
based on market information. We further propose a simple
but effective trading strategy that can be used in combination
with the prediction models. Out-of-sample tests show that a
return of as high as 60% over two and half months can be
consistently exploited even under conservative assumptions.
In sum, we wish to raise the awareness of pump-and-dump
schemes permeating the crypto-market through our study. We
show that with fairly rudimentary machine learning models,
one can accurately predict pump-and-dump target coins in
the crypto-market. As such, we hope our research could, on
one hand, lead to fewer people falling victim to market ma-
nipulation and more people trading strategically, and on the
other hand, urge the adoption of new technology for regu-
lators to detect market abuse and criminal behavior. If such
advice would be heeded, admins’ schemes would crumble,
which would in turn lead to a healthier trading environment,
accelerating the market towards a fairer and more efficient
equilibriu
