Program Description
Purpose: The Adam Walsh Act Implementation Grant Program 
supports implementation and maintenance of the Sex Offender 
Registration and Notification Act (SORNA). SORNA helps
jurisdictions create and sustain comprehensive programs to consistently
register, monitor and alert communities about sex offenders. The 
program also supports the development and implementation of 
technology tools that allow cross-jurisdictional information sharing to 
eliminate safe havens for sex offenders.
The National Sex Offender Public Website (NSOPW) is a unique
public safety resource that provides the public with access to sex 
offender registration information nationwide. NSOPW is a partnership 
among the Department of Justice and states, U.S. territories, tribal 
governments and the District of Columbia.
Authorizing Legislation: The Adam Walsh Child Protection and 
Safety Act of 2006 (P.L.109-248); 34 U.S.C. ยง 20901 and 20922
First Year of Appropriation: 2008
Administering Agency: Office of Sex Offender Sentencing, 
Monitoring, Apprehending, Registering, and Tracking (SMART 
Office)
DOJ Strategic Goal and Objective
DOJ Strategic Goal 3: Reduce Violent Crime and Promote Public Safety 
Strategic Objective 3.1: Combat violent crime, promote safe communities, and uphold the rights of victims of 
crime
Who Can Apply for Funding: Historically, Adam Walsh Act (AWA) implementation grants were limited to 
states, principal U.S. territories, the District of Columbia and federally recognized Indian tribal governments that
opted to implement SORNA. In FY 2019, counties in implemented jurisdictions will also be eligible to apply for 
AWA funding. Other SMART Office programs are open to individuals, research institutions, and justice policy 
organizations.
How Funds Are Distributed: 
Category Key Program Areas Award 
Type
Award 
Amounts
Award 
Period
Adam Walsh Act 
Implementation Grant 
Program
Maintaining and Enhancing SORNA Substantial 
Implementation in States, Territories, Tribal 
Jurisdictions and the District of Columbia Grants
Up to 
$400,000 
Up to 36 
months Support for SORNA Implementation in 
Counties
Up to 
$150,000
Support for Implementation and Integration of 
the Sex Offender Registry Tool (SORTA)
Up to $1 
million
