Howard Roark, the soul of 'THE FOUNTAIN HEAD', was an Ayn Rand's creation.People yearn for what they aren't.   It is one of the few books I read and re-read again. Words do not always convey the same meaning for everyone who read it, and this attribute makes it very interesting. My perception of this character can be whole lot different from someone else's view.  Roark, precisely, is a super thinker and to-the-core rationalist. Narrated as an athesist, more aptly an intellectual athesist*. He choose architecture to be his reason to live, and he stood by his decision.    And me, anything but what I have said above. Follower of intutions and a believer of destiny. Personality and acumen can be sharpened by constant thinking and be refined by reading good books. In my limited reading experience I have observed a marked difference in the manner I think. Every book takes us one step closer to being better than what we were, but ultimately it falls on our shoulder to drive it in a positive direction.  Athesist; I takes a super thinker and a core rationalist to be an athesist. Athesit whom I came across are not so. They call themselves so just to show they are differnt and don't follow the average crowd. Somehow I can wholly comprehend to what they think, one reason being I was one such dickhead. Sometimes some books influence us so much that we tend to think in the way author wants us, this indicates the author's smartness and the reader's weakness. We are hit by a surge of excellent reasoning and it takes a while to find an answer, and it is between the hit and reasoning people tend to change. Beware of good authors!  -Disciple
My closest confidant was a person, like me with strong opinions and very hard working, so unlike me. Carried his duties with an air of independence, great passion and strived for perfection. Though the last two remains unchallanged, the first quality which I admired the most has been unsettled by an unsuccessful relationship.   There are always lessons to be learnt from every experience in life, and we should consider ourselves lucky if we could comprehend to others failures and success which could help us growup as a better decision maker. This will be one such incident which would establish the fact that the person evoloves and improves with experience.  Emotions over power our ability to act according to the situation. Many a times, we would think right and act wrong. And he is going through that phase now. When I hear him speak, the words sounds to have sprung from the sanest person, although he realises that, the emotions and memories erupt to disturb his mental peace. Time is a great healer of anything, and I hope he comes out of it taking the shortest duration.   -Disciple
Pisceian's Crushes:  Sensitive issues in my life, however the importance given to it is far greater than what it really deserves.   A person who portays as a strong willed and a highly opinionated can be easily misunderstood as indifferent and eccentric. I guess this is what happened with my crush at work! Honestly, I have to bear a part of the blame for such an fiasco. The relationship with the girl was quite smooth..exchanged a lot of common thoughts, shared the same wavelengh..surprisingly similar liking towards music and books. Everything looked like a strong platform for a good relationship. Life is very unpridictable, and that is what makes everyday very interesting. You might have guessed by now, the relationship never elevated to the next higher level, though we exchange occasional casual mails. She found someone else more interesting, and unfortunately he didn't turn out to be a good choice. Both of us, me and the girl knew of our interests but never openly admitted except once during a chat when she hinted about what I had lost. Till this day I am not sure if it was meant to be an open invitation or just a remark?! So that was a sting from a flirtatious Scorpio.  The recent crush was at work again! A nice girl..have no idea about her interests except that she is a very organized,likeable and a lovable one. This interest in her wouldn't have been kindled if she hadn't asked few questions about myself. Naturally, I was quite flattered. At the same time, I hate to jump into conclusions and dream a relationship...Call it patience or reluctance fearing the answer..I don't think I would make the first move...I am just gonna wait for the aquarious to make a more precise hint.   There was a relationship in college, which I hate to call it crush. It was more of a mutual affection and care we shared. There had been times when I couldn't exactly define the feeling towards her, in short I was confused. Now, I can look back and say it wasn't a crush neither was it infatuation. It was something more of an unconditional love and affection. Thinking about it would bring back good memories which I would cherish for the rest of my life - The Virgo.  -Disciple
Retracing the lost years increases the scope to learn and correct a lot of mistakes. Reveals immaturity and lack of rational decision which had led to a rather difficult spot, which could have been easier otherwise. Maybe that is the price we pay to become matured, read as experienced.   24 years, since 19 March 1980, can be divided into pre TCEian (Tamilnadu Ccollege Of Engineering)and post TCEian. The common denominator between the split life is a dreamer and an occasional enthusiast. All along these days, wasn't a day without a dream to acheive, though without much effort towards realizing it. Although retarded with laziness some goals have been reached with the aide of occasioal surge of enthusiasm.  Adorer of any good music, spent some useful time in learning to play Violin, and the new found passion includes playing leads on my roomie's Guitar. Pencil sketching and reading doesn't trail too far b
