This article is in the 99th percentile (ranked 116th) of the 304,316 tracked articles of a similar age in all journals and the 99th percentile (ranked 1st) of the 9 tracked articles of a similar age in Nature Communications

View more on Altmetric

Altmetric calculates a score based on the online attention an article receives. Each coloured thread in the circle represents a different type of online attention. The number in the centre is the Altmetric score. Social media and mainstream news media are the main sources that calculate the score. Reference managers such as Mendeley are also tracked but do not contribute to the score. Older articles often score higher because they have had more time to get noticed. To account for this, Altmetric has included the context data for other articles of a similar age.

Mentions in news and blogs
Space hurricane observed for the first time
Sign of the Times
中国科学家首次发现“太空台风”
China Science Communication
Kõrgel taevas möllas kosmiline orkaan
ERR.ee
News story from The Mirror on Monday 01 March 2021
The Mirror
News story from Shropshire Star on Monday 01 March 2021
Shropshire Star
News story from Express & Star on Monday 01 March 2021
Express & Star
Scientists spotted a 'space hurricane' swirling above the magnetic north pole. It was raining charged solar particles.
Yahoo! News
News story from Evening Express on Monday 01 March 2021
Evening Express
Científicos descubren el primer huracán espacial en la atmósfera superior de la Tierra
TekCrispy
Scientists discovered space hurricane that rains electron
Tech Explorist
Scientists observe a wild space hurricane above Earth for the first time - CNET
CNET News
Hurrikán volt az űrben az Északi-sarkvidék fölött
Qubit
Researchers Observe ‘Space Hurricane’ in Earth’s Ionosphere
Sci-News.com
Plasma "space hurricane" detected over Earth for first time
Gizmag Emerging Technology Magazine
For The First Time, A 'Space Hurricane' Has Been Detected Over The North Pole
Science Alert
Scientists Spot Space Hurricane For The First Time Ever
Curiomsos
